Start system overview and requirements. (#3)
abetterinternet/prio-documents: design-document.md

# Prio v3 Design Document

## Architecture overview

Prio is a system and protocol for privately computing aggregation functions over private 

> input. An aggregation function F is one that computes an output y = F(x1,x2,...) for inputs
> xi. In general, Prio supports any aggregation function whose inputs can be encoded in a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input. An aggregation function F is one that computes an output y = F(x[1],x[2],...) for inputs
x[i]. In general, Prio supports any aggregation function whose inputs can be encoded in a 
```

particular way. However, not all aggregation functions admit an efficient encoding, rendering
them impractical to implement. Thus, Prio supports a limited set of aggregation functions, 
some of which we highlight below:

> - Simple statistics, including sum, mean, min, max, variance, and standard deviation;

Reviewer: [[OPEN ISSUE: It's possible to estimate quantiles such as the median. How practical is this?]]

> - Simple statistics, including sum, mean, min, max, variance, and standard deviation;

Author: ```suggestion
- Simple statistics, including sum, mean, min, max, variance, and standard deviation; [[OPEN ISSUE: It's possible to estimate quantiles such as the median. How practical is this?]]

```

- Bit vector OR and AND operations; and

> - Count-min sketch (approximated frequency counts) over a closed universe of strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data structures, like Bloom filters, counting Bloom filters, and count-min sketches, that approximately represent (multi-)sets of strings.
```

The applications for such aggregations functions are large, including, though not limited to:
counting the number of times a sensitive or private event occurs and approximating the frequency
that sensitive tokens or strings occur.

Client applications hold private inputs to the aggregation function, server processors,

> or aggregators, invoke  multi-party computation to compute the output, and a final collector 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or aggregators, run a protocol that validates each input x[1], x[2], ... and computes the final output y. The final collector  
```

("invoke multi-party computation" sounds like we're doing general purpose MPC.)

 (1) Batch submission       |            |        (3) Collection
    +-----------------------> Aggregator +------------------+
    |                       |            |                  |
    |                       +-^-------^--+                  |
    |                         |       |                     |
    |                         |       |                     |
    |                         |       |  (2) MPC            |
+--------+           +--------v---+   |      eval      +----v------+
|        |           |            |   |                |           |
| Client +-----------> Aggregator |   |                | Collector |
|        |           |            |   |                |           |
+--------+           +--------^---+   |                +----^------+
    |                         |       |                     |
    |                         |       |                     | 
    |                         |       |                     |
    |                       +-v-------v--+                  |
    |                       |            |                  |
    +-----------------------> Aggregator +------------------+
                            |            |

>                             +------------+

Reviewer: Pretty! Though I think we need to align this with the candidate protocol #2. In particular, I would remove the wires going from the client to the top and bottom aggregators, and I would rename the middle aggregator to "Leader'.

~~~ 

1. Applications split inputs into multiple (at least two) anonymized and encrypted shares,
   and upload each share to different aggregators that do not collude or otherwise share 
   data with one another. Applications continue this process until a "batch" of data is 
   collected. Upon receipt of a share, each aggregator verifies it for correctness. 
   (Details about input validation and how it pertains to system security properties is 

>    in {{CITE}}.)

Reviewer: Needs alignment with the candidate protocol of #2.

2. Each aggregator combines its shares into a partial sum. The aggregators then engage 
   in a multi-party protocol to combine these sums into a final, aggregated output.
3. The aggregated output is sent to the collector.

The output of a single batch aggregation reveals little to nothing beyond the value itself.

## Security overview

Prio assumes a powerful adversary with the ability to compromise an unbounded number of 

> clients. In doing so, the adversary can input malicious (yet truthful) to the aggregation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clients. In doing so, the adversary can provide malicious (yet truthful) inputs to the aggregation 
```
Also, what does "yet truthful" mean here?

1. Leader: A distinguished aggregator that coordinates input validation and data
   aggregation.

## Architecture overview

Prio is a system and protocol for privately computing aggregation functions over private 
input. An aggregation function F is one that computes an output y = F(x[1],x[2],...) for inputs
x[i]. In general, Prio supports any aggregation function whose inputs can be encoded in a 

> particular way. However, not all aggregation functions admit an efficient encoding, rendering

Author: Indeed -- and the mechanism is described later on in this doc, so I figured best to keep it high level for now.

                            |            |        
                            | Aggregator |
                            |            |
                            +-^-------^--+
                              |       |   
                          (2) |       | (3)
                              |       |    
+--------+           +--------v---+   |        +-----------+
|        |    (1)    |            <---+   (4)  |           |
| Client +----------->   Leader   +------------> Collector |
|        |           |            <---+        |           |
+--------+           +--------^---+   |        +-----------+
                              |       |       
                          (2) |       | (3)       
                              |       |        
                            +-v-------v--+     
                            |            |     
                            | Aggregator |
                            |            |
                            +------------+
~~~ 

1. Upload: Clients split inputs into s >= 2 shares, encrypt each share for a different 
   Aggregator, and send these encrypted shares to the Leader. Clients continue 

>    this process until a "batch" of data is collected.

Author: That's a good point! I'll move this batch cutoff to the leader step.

2. Verify: Upon receipt of an encrypted share, the Leader sends it to the respective 

>    Aggregator. Each Aggregator decrypts the share, computes a proof from the respective

Author: That's one possibility, sure, but I don't think that's necessary. The leader could package up signed keys that it collects from aggregators and send them to the client. Clients could also fetch them directly from aggregators (if they knew what aggregators to fetch from). From a client perspective, the former seems simpler, since it would allow us to punt on aggregator discovery.

>    Aggregator. Each Aggregator decrypts the share, computes a proof from the respective

Reviewer 2: The leader could vend signed keys on behalf of aggregators, but the client still needs to discover a trusted public key for each aggregator to then verify the signed keys. I think you have to bootstrap trust between the client and each participating aggregator independently from the leader, or the leader can impersonate aggregators and defeat the system's privacy guarantees.

>    Aggregator. Each Aggregator decrypts the share, computes a proof from the respective

Reviewer: IMO it's better to avoid creating a new PKI and just have aggregators distribute their own encryption keys. I'm open to being wrong, however :)

>    Aggregator. Each Aggregator decrypts the share, computes a proof from the respective

Author: I'm not suggesting a new PKI for this.

>    Aggregator. Each Aggregator decrypts the share, computes a proof from the respective

Author: >  but the client still needs to discover a trusted public key for each aggregator to then verify the signed keys.

Yes, it does, and I'm suggesting this can be done by asking the leader to provide the signed keys.

   Aggregator sends their aggregated input shares to the Leader, who then combines all
   aggregates into a final result. 
4. Collect: The aggregated output is sent to the Collector.

The output of a single batch aggregation reveals little to nothing beyond the value itself.

## Security overview

Prio assumes a powerful adversary with the ability to compromise an unbounded number of 
clients. In doing so, the adversary can provide malicious (yet truthful) inputs to the aggregation 
function. Prio also assumes that all but one server operates honestly, where a dishonest
server does not execute the protocol faithfully as specified. The system also assumes
that servers communicate over secure and mutually authenticated channels. In practice,
this can be done by TLS or some other form of application-layer authentication.

In the presence of this adversary, Prio provides two important properties for computing 
an aggergation function F:

1. Privacy. The adversary learns only the output of F computed over all client inputs, 
   and nothing else. 
1. Robustness. The adversary can influence the output of F only by reporting false 

>    (untruthful) data. The output cannot be influenced in any other way.

Reviewer 2: The 2017 paper's section 2 discusses _anonymity_ alongside privacy and robustness. However I'm not sure how to draw a clear distinction between anonymity and privacy in this context so maybe it's not worth discussing in this doc.

Author: Indeed. I suggest we leave this as-is for now.

Reviewer: I would resolve this by adding a refereence to the paper.

## System design

## Open questions and system parameters {#questions-and-params}

[[OPEN ISSUE: discuss batch size parameter and thresholds]]

> [[OPEN ISSUE: discuss f^ leakage differences from HCG's paper]]

Reviewer: What does "f^" mean?

Reviewer: To resolve this, please add a reference to the paper.

Author: Can you please leave what you're looking for as a suggestion? (There is a reference -- "HCG's paper" -- no?)
